[docs] Document `x-export-port` command (#27788)
microsoft/vcpkg: docs/commands/export-port.md

# vcpkg export-port

**The latest version of this documentation is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg/tree/master/docs/commands/export-port.md).**

## Synopsis
```no-highlight

> vcpkg export-port [options] <package> [version] <destination>

Reviewer: Optional positional arguments in the middle are pretty weird. I think a `--version=...` would be cleaner.

Author: Yeah, I was unsure about this as well but didn't want to separate the version from the port name. I'll go with the option route and remove the positional argument.

Author: @BillyONeal has suggested using `port@version` notation, e.g.: `fmt@8.1.1#2`

Reviewer: If you go the `port@version` route, I recommend adding it to our common package spec parsing (see `parse_qualified_specifier()`)[1]. Probably this would be easiest by further extending the underlying parser and then adding guards on the way out of all existing functions. This will ensure that we maintain a consistent universal syntax for all port/package references.

As a suggestion, the total grammar could be:
```
port[f1,f2,...]@version:triplet (qualifier)
```
or
```
port[f1,f2,...]:triplet@version (qualifier)
```
I like the first one better because I feel like it ties `version` closer to the `port`.

[1]: https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg-tool/blob/efd9e2230813201cbbe0c894ac3e4fc0033566d2/src/vcpkg/packagespec.cpp#L96

```

## Description
Export a package's port files to a destination.

> ### Classic Mode

Reviewer: If a version is provided, I don't think there should be a difference between Manifest Mode and Classic Mode (other than the usual "where is vcpkg-configuration.json found" differences).

In Classic Mode, this command exports the port files for a package in the built-in vcpkg catalog to a destination. 

> By default, the exported files will be copied into a subdirectory named after the package in the destination, parent directories will be created as necessary. 

Reviewer: I think this line belongs in the description of `--no-subdir`.

Additionally, I think it makes more intuitive sense to reverse the default (i.e. by default export directly into the path named by the user, but provide a `--subdir` option).

> Unless a version is specified, this command will copy the package's port files currently on disk. 

Reviewer: I think this sentence needs some expanding because 'on disk' isn't clear for all users. For example:

```suggestion
If a version is not specified, this command will export the port that would be selected by [`vcpkg install` in Classic Mode](install.md#classic-mode).
```

The version argument can be passed to export the port files for a specific version of the package. A port version can be specified using the syntax `{version}#{port version}`. For example,  `8.1.1#2` means version `8.1.1` with port version `2`.

### Manifest Mode
This command is not available in manifest mode.

## Example
```no-highlight

> $ vcpkg export-port fmt 8.1.1#2 ~/overlay-ports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ vcpkg x-export-port fmt 8.1.1#2 ~/overlay-ports
```

        * `+` (plus sign), and 
        * `_` (underscore). 

    * For legacy reasons, the `#` (number sign) character is never allowed as part of a version identifier to avoid ambiguity with the port-version delimiter. 

    This command has two modes of operation: un-versioned and versioned. 
    For un-versioned package specs, the exported port files correspond to the version of the port that Classic Mode installs.
    For version-qualified package specs, the port files corresponding to the version identifier are exported.

    Version-qualified package specs are looked up in the configured registry set. The `--no-registries` option can be passed to disable registry lookup.

* **`<destination>`**: The destination directory where the package's port files will be exported into, parent directories above the `destination` path will be created as necessary. By default, vcpkg will refuse to export to a directory that is not empty. The `--force` option forces vcpkg to export files to a non-empty directory, all existing files in `destination` will be deleted before exporting.

## Example
### Basic examples
```no-highlight
$vcpkg export zlib C:\overlay-ports\zlib

> Port files have been exported to C:\overlay-ports\zlib

Reviewer 2: Maybe use an example that works on all platforms like `vcpkg export zlib overlay-ports/zlib`

## Synopsis
```no-highlight
vcpkg export-port <package-spec> <destination> [options]
```

## Description
Export a package's port files to a destination.

* **`<package-spec>`**: The most basic form of a package spec is a single port name. This command accepts non-qualified and version-qualified package specs.

>     * The version-qualifier is an `@` (at sign) followed by a version identifier. Version identifiers consist of two parts, the version string and an optional numeric port-version separated by a `#` (number sign). Example: `1.0.0#1`, `2020-11-21#3`, `hello` (equivalent to `hello#0`). 

Reviewer 2: > `hello` (equivalent to `hello#0`

I really don't like that. Imho it should choose the latest available port version for that version. Users probably want the latest available port-version and looking this up is tedious. Also the port with the port-version 0 often contains a lot of bugs that are fixed by later port versions. If you don't want to default to `hello#latest` for `hello` maybe make this an error and say that the user probably want `hello#latest` with latest = number of latest port version.

Author: This is to keep consistency with the rest of the places where no port-version implies `#0`. I can see us adding `#latest` as a convenience at a later point.

>     * All spaces and special characters in a version identifier must be escaped by prefixing them with a `\` (forward slash). For example, `tag\:1"`. To make it easier to match dot-separated and date versions, the following characters are not required to be escaped: 

Reviewer 2: > `\` (forward slash)

backward slash? 

And what is the reason for that? Why do I have to escape the characters for vcpkg?

Reviewer 3: >Why do I have to escape the characters for vcpkg?

Given `example@hello:x64-windows`, is that:

```
{
    "port_name": "example",
    "version": "hello",
    "port-version": 0,
    "triplet": "x64-windows"
}
```

or:

```
{
    "port_name": "example",
    "version": "hello:x64-windows",
    "port-version": 0,
    "triplet": null
}
```

`version-string` can contain `:`.

Reviewer 3: That said, it isn't clear to me why anything other than `:` need be escaped? In particular, needing to escape `.` sucks for most versions, `+` sucks for semver, and `-` sucks for dates. `_` seems unmotivated.

I think only `:` needs to be escaped?

Author: At the very least, `\` needs to be always escaped as well. The reason for escaping other characters is that we may want to add new reserved symbols at some point in the future.
